---
layout: post
author: Jussi
date: 2021-02-28 16:25
---

Today I read a nice piece from the Ekonomi magazine. It was about hurry and how to cope it and the stress that comes with it. This hurry can be a result of too much of work, goals or expectations. A recent study discovered that hurry itself has not increased in the 2000's but the things creating it have changed. The amount of work is increasing constantly. That is the reason why _one has to draw clear boundaries for oneself_. 

The best way to cope in this fast-paced environment is to _get enough sleep_. Lack of sleep can cause decrease in short-term and working memory capabilities. All is about managing oneself. One should _recognize what are the things that one can affect and concentrate on those_. This will alleviate the stress. 
**Three circles exercise**.

One important skill is to prioritise. You have to make sure tou prioritise the really important and urgent tasks. Do not try to think what others might appreciate. Leave some slack in your calendar. Leave also space for some surprises. You'll never know what will happen during the day. Also, remember to hold your schedule. Lots of things and different type of requests will come but you just have to stay strict and prioritise brutally. 
**Saku Tuominen***. 

The way in which people think about time differs. So if someone asks something from you asap, make sure you both know what is meant by that. When you delegate yourself, be very precise to let the other person know when you need to have something done. 

Create some peaceful moments to your day, moments when you do something you really enjoy. This could be a short mindfulness exercise, for example. Try to avoid all the distractions at all costs as it will take from 1-24 minutes to get back at the task you were working on when you got distracted. 

The stress and hurry should not become cronic. It is managements duty to make sure there are enough resources available. You must still also look into the mirror - especially if you are a very driven and ambitious person. Then it is hard to say no and try to push forward even though your calendar would already be fully booked. Sometimes you just have to say no. 

I have struggled with this myself. A lot. I had this idea of climbing the corporate ladder and becoming very succesful and to that image saying no did not fit. At least not in my head. It became necessary to ask for help. And the funny thing is that you actually feel bad and less important when some tasks are taken away from you even though it will help you to cope. I had to learn few things about this. 

It is also helpful to keep in mind that people normally underestimate the time needed for tasks. That is why you could _multiply your first estimate by 1.5 to create some slack_. 