---
layout: page
title: Atomic Habits by James Clear
permalink: /atomichabits/
---

Year 2022 challenge will be kicked off with this book - James Clear's Atomic Habits. I got this one from my sister as a Christmas present and it did not take too long to finish it. I read it mostly mornings, taking notes while reading. I liked the structure of the book; the chapters were quite short and ended with a summary to reinforce learning. The design was very clear and minimalistic, not too many images or confusing spreadsheets. For me the information was laid out in nice bite-sized nuggets that one could take and act upon. I also enjoyed the fact that the tips and tricks were presented as something one can use to make more out of each day, not that following these rules laid out in the book would make you a Hollywood actor and a millionaire. 

In the following I will outline the structure of the book and my main learnings from it. If you have read the book, it might sound rather like a book summary to you and in some sense it is just that. I will be covering some of the techniques in other posts and discuss then more how I implemented them in my daily routines. If you got interested and want to read more I highly encourage you to grab the book and read it through. As mentioned above, the book is very easy to read. But anyway, now more about the book itself. Here we go!

James Clear starts the book by laying out the fundamentals - what are habits, goals, systems and the differences between them. I have written a separate [post]() about goals and systems and how they are separated. Goal is a one-time thing whereas systems are something you build and use every day. As habits are by nature something to repeat, it is better to concentrate on building good systems than trying to achieve a certain goal with whatever system you happen to have in place. It is also important to remember that if we focus on goals, we only feel the joy when we reach that goal and it can severely impact our overall happiness. If you focus on systems you can feel happy and satisfied more often. 

Habit is a behavior that has been repeated so many times that it has become automatic. If it is satisfying, it is likely repeated. Habit is also a mental shortcut that reduces cognitive load as it is carried out by our non-conscious mind. Every habit consist of a feedback loop that can be split to four steps: cue, craving, response and reward. If you want to change your behavior you just need to remember following four laws: make it obvious, make it attractive, make it easy and make it satisfying. 

First thing to notice is that habit change is an identity change. How one thinks about oneself has to change. The right mindset is to think what kind of person you want to be - do you want to be an athlete, singer, yogi? After you have identified this, you'll become this kind of person. You show up each and every day and do the things this kind of person does. 

Habit creation is a long process but small improvements do compound over time, like interest. The challenge is that to improve over time and to keep things interesting, one has to raise the bar little by little. Otherwise one will plateau on the current skill level and does not improve anymore. Therefore just enough challenge is needed to keep things interesting and rewarding, when habits or tasks are succesfully completed. 

A powerful technique to support you with your daily habits is to design your environment in a way that supports these habits and actions you want to take. Classic example is a bowl of fruits - when you keep that in sight, you will eat more fruits compared to a situation where those same fruits are stacked in the most remote corner of your cupboard. What you need to do is to *reduce friction* between you and the desired action. Most successful people do not have better self-control, they just control their environment in a way that this self-control is not needed most of the time. One way to control the environment could be to leave the sweet stuff to the supermarket or if you happen to have something at home, just put it as far away from you as possible. This way you'll create *more friction* between you and the undesired action. 

Another very effective way to enforce habits or wanted behavior is to join a group of like-minded people. In finnish there is a saying that a group makes you like it is. Why not then surround yourself with people that are excited about the same things you are or desire to be? It is then easier to act as the things you do are the norm in that group, even though they might not be the norm in the wider society. Also having an accountability partner helps. That means you get a person to whom you are accountable on your actions. It is easier to let the harder stuff pass if you are accountable to only yourself but having a person (or persons) to whom you report will make you stick to whatever you are doing. This era of social media makes this very easy - just post to your followers what you are going to do and be accountable to

With all this habit building, it is good to remember that we humans have the brains of our ancestors but the temptations we face are something our ancestors never experienced. For example, the junk food keeps our brains constantly firing and dopamine flowing.

It took me some time to actually finish this text after I had finished the book. Weeks, really. And to polish and publish it took some more weeks! What I really learned the hard way is that you really should start small and be persistent. Habits that I built with very small increments did succeed, whereas others were more than I could chew. I made the classic mistake of trying to get every habit in place immediately. That was not successful. I still have my morning routines like writing a diary, weighing myself, doing some yoga, reading and writing but everything I tried to achieve after work did fail. That is something where I need to concentrate next. 

If you'd like to read more about habits, I have heard lot of good things about The Power of Habit by Charles Duhigg. Go and check that out as well! 