---
layout: post
title: My books for 2022
---

Hello, you! I have been an avid reader as long as I can remember. If you have no idea of who I am and have wandered here by accident, please have a look [here]({% link about.markdown %}). Well, now that we have the introductions out of the way we could have a look at what most of the stuff here is really about; books. Whenever I am reading a book, I try to learn something. Learning is tremendously reinforced when you actually try to tell someone what you have read and learned or try to put these things into practice. Therefore I thought it would be nice to set a challenge to myself to write a few paragraphs about the books I found fascinating during year 2022. Currently my idea is to tell something about the book in question, maybe something about the author, think about what I learned, about what I could implement to my own life (if possible) and so on. 

This "challenge" will also fulfill another thing that has been haunting me for such a long time already - writing. So many times I have thought about it, started making some notes on interesting topics (being in action vs. being in motion - check Atomic habits by James Clear!) but never really got into releasing anything. There was always something on the way. I can think of many pretenses but I think the only reason was that I was too critical on my own writings. Somehow we Finns so often are like that - too self-critical. So with this reading-writing thing I also want to fulfill one goal of mine: being a writer (of sorts, at least). 

But if we still go back to the task at hand for 2022, I decided that the number of books to write about is 12 - one for each month. Inspiration for it came from a colleague who recommended twelve books for 2021. It might (and most likely will) be that I'll read more than twelve books but as I am working full-time and study at the university on the side, I don't want to overcommit to something and make a burden out of it. What these twelve books will be, I do not yet know but I will fill this list as I go on. By following the link you can find out what I have to say about each of them. Before I have written the summary, that link will lead you to Amazon so you can buy the book, if you wish. 

For now the list looks like this: 
1. [Atomic Habits](https://www.amazon.com/Atomic-Habits-Proven-Build-Break/dp/0735211299) by James Clear
2. [Continuous Discovery Habits]() by Teresa Torres
3. [Inspired - how to create tech products customers love](https://www.amazon.com/INSPIRED-Create-Tech-Products-Customers/dp/1119387507) by Marty Cagan
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9.  
10. 
11. 
12. 